1. Open Firewall Configuration Tool (Windows)

Steps Performed:
→ Windows Settings → Privacy & Security → Windows Security → Firewall & network protection → Advanced settings
→ Opened Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security
→ Viewed Inbound Rules and Outbound Rules

2. List Current Firewall Rules

Steps Performed:
→ I exported the existing Inbound Rules and Outbound Rules from the Windows Defender Firewall.
→ I downloaded both rule sets as CSV files.
→ I added these CSV files to the repository as separate reference documents.
→ I analyzed the inbound and outbound traffic rules to understand how the firewall filters and manages network traffic based on predefined policies.

3. Add a Rule to Block Inbound Traffic on a Specific Port (e.g., Port 23 – Telnet)

Steps Performed:
→ I opened Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security.
→ I navigated to Inbound Rules and selected New Rule and the wizard prompted me to configure several options.
→ For Rule Type, I selected Port because I needed to control traffic on a specific network port.
→ In Protocol and Ports, I chose TCP, since Telnet operates over the TCP protocol, and I selected Specific local ports and entered 23 to ensure the rule targeted only Telnet traffic.
→ In the Action section, I selected Block the connection to prevent any inbound connections on Port 23.
→ In the Profile section, I selected Domain, Private, and Public so the rule would apply across all network environments.
→ Finally, in the Name and Description section, I named the rule “Block Telnet Port 23” and added a brief description stating that the rule blocks inbound Telnet traffic for security purposes.

4. Test the Rule by Attempting to Connect to Port 23

Steps Performed:
→ I tested the firewall rule using PowerShell with the command:
Test-NetConnection -ComputerName localhost -Port 23
RESULT:
WARNING: TCP connect to (::1 : 23) failed                                                                          
WARNING: TCP connect to (127.0.0.1 : 23) failed                                                                         

ComputerName           : localhost
RemoteAddress          : ::1
RemotePort             : 23
InterfaceAlias         : Loopback Pseudo-Interface 1
SourceAddress          : ::1
PingSucceeded          : True
PingReplyDetails (RTT) : 0 ms
TcpTestSucceeded       : False

Result explanation:
The result showed warnings indicating that TCP connections to both the IPv6 (::1) and IPv4 (127.0.0.1) loopback addresses failed, meaning the system was unable to establish a connection on Port 23.
→ The output also displayed TcpTestSucceeded : False, confirming that the firewall successfully blocked inbound traffic on Port 23 as intended.

6. Remove the Test Block Rule to Restore the Original State

Steps Performed:
→ I opened Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security.
→ I navigated to the Inbound Rules section.
→ I located the previously created rule named “Block Telnet Port 23”.
→ I right-clicked the rule and selected Delete.
→ I confirmed the deletion when prompted, which removed the rule and restored the firewall to its original configuration.

7. Document the Commands or GUI Steps Used

Steps Performed:
→ I documented all the GUI steps followed within the Windows Defender Firewall with Advanced Security console, including navigating through Inbound Rules, creating a new rule, configuring the port, action, profile, and naming options.
→ I also recorded the PowerShell command used to test the rule
→ These details were compiled to provide a clear reference for the rule creation, testing, and removal process.

8. Summary: How the Firewall Filters Traffic

Summary:
→ The firewall filtered traffic by evaluating incoming and outgoing network packets against predefined rules.
→ For each packet, the firewall checked criteria such as protocol, port number, direction (inbound or outbound), and network profile.
→ Based on the rules I configured, the firewall applied the defined action—either allowing or blocking the traffic.
→ In the case of Port 23, the firewall inspected inbound packets targeting that port and applied the “Block the connection” rule, preventing Telnet traffic from reaching the system.
→ This rule-based filtering ensured that only authorized and safe network connections were permitted.

